{:index:}

Make Terra go wow. But I've got nothing right now.






===
* chapter zero
Chapter Zero

See the spaceman, prototypical, stereotypical even, a hard man above all, never
seen wearing anything but a pilot's spacesuit, all black leather, and a
blaster hung low at his hip.

Kimbro was a Terran. Few people knew his given name, and most
just called him Kimbro.

Early in a former life he had been taken by the Elders and raised on
  one of their mysterious worlds to be an Auxiliar to the several
  human species of the Sol System. A Commissar is one of the varieties
  of Auxiliar, the kind that preaches and enforces the Ways of the
  Elders amongst homins, and a Commissar is what They made him. His
  brain functions were boosted to six or eight times homin normal so
  that he might grasp the thoughts and words and deeds of the Elders
  and transmit the meanings of them to hominity. Then came disgrace. A
  nameless disgrace which the Elders have never divulged. Neither,
  thus far, has he. 

Now he is barred from the society of the Elders, from the Stars
themselves. Bound to Terra, Mars and Venus and the little colonies and
outposts and space stations scattered through Sol System. 

Most of all bound to the human races. To those who cannot think as
well or as clearly or as fast as he. At first, his shame was more than
he could bear, so armed with a true and complete self knowledge
gifted to him by the Elders, along with a sustained effort of will
beyond baseline homin comprehension, this hard man killed his shame.
Killed his guilt. 

And in this manner he had found the key to his joy. From his days as
Commissar he still owned a small spacecraft, the /Carrion Crow/, the
kind of vessel called a /corvette/ for it could make planetfall and
fly from world to world inside Sol System. It had no translux drive.
He was forbidden that. But he began to hunt bounties and became a
part-time smuggler too. He excelled at both endeavours. After a while
at these pursuits he realized something, namely that in all the Three
Worlds (which were all the worlds left to him) there was no place for
him but one, only one place that suited him even a little, that could
tolerate his long-term residence. The Low-Canals of Mars. 

He is dangerous as he plies his trade, one of the more dangerous
homins you could ever meet. He is more dangerous as he chases escape
from the hell that is himself through the gratification of his mind,
his refined taste, and his seemingly infinite appetites. And there is
no place for pleasure, for leisure -- no matter what that means to a
person -- like the Low-Canals.

"Hope is for idiots, defectives and defunctives. The homin who's truly
aware will live for spite or won't live long at all. Not here anyway,"
somebody overheard him say one day. The day, as it happened, was one
of those rare rainy Martian days, hot and stuffy here in the
Low-Canals, near the Equator, when the clouds pile up so thick it gets
near dark outside. 

===
the hat is bad.
===
