Jagarôth dictionary
{:index:}

CHANGES
s/-ash/-ast/ :: it sounds more metal :: DONE

;; maybe this, maybe not
s/verbal prefix: -en/verbal prefix: -em/gc

TABLE :: verbal subject and nominal possessor suffixes
 |---------|-----------------------------------------|
 | \-em    | 1st person.(singular implied)           |
 | \-emen  | 1st person.plural                       |
 | \-eps   | 2nd person.(singular implied)           |
 | \-epsen | 2nd person.plural                       |
 | \-eth   | 3rd person.(singular implied) sapient   |
 | \-ethen | 3rd person.plural sapient               |
 | \-os    | 3rd person.(singular implied) insapient |
 | \-osen  | 3rd person.plural insapient             |
 |---------|-----------------------------------------|

;; eliminate {$ -sest}[-sest]
;; -sest might be unnecessary 

need: or

{$ zip}[zip]

{$ tot}[tot]

$ meth
conjunction :: or
;  there is not an enclitic equivalent as there is for _gash_; _meth_ is the only Jagarôth word for _or_

$ perd
verbal root :: to destroy, to cause to perish, to ruin
; from Yrthic language Greek :: perdein, to destroy
; but actually it means "to fart" so what the fuck??
; valency :: S (nominative) v. O (accusative)
; perdax :: a destroyed one; a thing lost, one lost
; î memen tethej perdaxen ::
; BE 1.pl.NOM 3.s.CARITIVE make-lost.PASS.pl
; we are without her lost

$ perdax
nominal :: a destroyed one; a thing lost, one lost


$ zip
number :: zero

$ zip 
number :: zero; no, none
;  numbers are both nouns and adjectives
;  example :: î Vov zip :: There is no God.
verbal root :: to not exist, to sum to zero
;  zipâl- :: finite verb :: is zero, does not exist
;  valency :: Subject (nominative) v. ::
;  example :: Vov zipâleth :: God is zero, God does not exist.

$ tot 
number :: one
;  numbers are both nouns and adjectives
;  example :: î Vovem Voveps-thor Vov tot ::
;  BE God.1s God.2s-and God one
;  My God and your God are one God.
verbal root :: to be one and the same, to be identical
;  valency :: Subject (nominative) v. ::
;  Vovem Voveps-thor totâlethen :: My God and Your God are identical/one.

$ sad
number :: two %(for usage see zip or tot)%

$ fat
number :: three %(for usage see zip or tot)%

$ fûm
number :: four  %(for usage see zip or tot)%

$ kest
number :: five

$ kor
number :: six

$ jeb
number :: seven

$ vûk
number :: eight

$ veps
number :: nine

$ sain
number :: ten

$ ken...wel
circumposition :: relative clause delimiters

$ ken...wel
circumposition :: relative clause delimiters
example :: î tan kentethot vê panâlen borgîz mûmbid wel ::
;  BE fellow.nom REL.3ss.acc PAST see.FIN.1s city.loc corpse.adj ENDREL
;  It's the fellow whom I saw in Dead City.


$ -then
conjunction :: that; subordinate clause marker

$ -then
conjunction :: that; subordinate clause marker
;  also marks indirect speech
;  spelâleth hûn-thenot kafâlen Marishov ::
;     say.FIN.3ss MORALOBLIGATION-that.ACC go.FIN.1ss Venus.all
;     He says he goes to Venus.


$ kenet
nominal :: dog

$ gîgôk
nominal :: the Martian runnerbat
;  descended from bats
;  evolved on yrthshapen Skârmoon
;  transplanted to Mars for hunting purposes
;  stand on what were their ancestors wings
;  prehensile hands (with thumbs!!) dangle between their legs
;  communicate through echolocation
;  now a scourge to the local population of Wahaz


$ vêgor
nominal :: the Martian wolf

$ homin
nominal :: a sapient that evolved on Yrth 
;  currently inhabits Marish (Venus), Skâr (Yrth), Skârmoon (Luna), Wahaz (Mars)
;  mohi :: nominal (anomalous) :: informal emission of "homin"
;  homi :: nominal (anomalous) :: informal emission of "homin"

$ jûjor
particle :: yes/no sentence marker

$ skrîd
the affirmative interjection :: yes

$ skrîdath
verbal root :: to affirm
;  valency :: transitive :: S (nom) vb. O (acc).
;  skrîd /yes/ + -ath /applicative verbal suffix/
;  skrîdathâleth staburneth rûthot ::
;  yes.APPLIC.FIN.3ss stand.nominalizer.3ss way-of-peace-reason-health.ACC

$ -ath :: verbal suffix :: applicative suffix
;

$ tath
verbal root :: apply
;  valency :: ditransitive :: Subject (nom) verbs Object (thing applied) (acc) Recipient/beneficiary (dat, perl)

$ vê
particle (tense marker) :: past tense

$ -âl
verbal suffix :: finite verb marker

$ -az :: verbal suffix :: active participial marker
;  conveys active voice if necessary
;  often conveys little more than progressive aspect
;  adjective + active participle ending \-az == smthg that is "adjective"

$ vîl
nominal :: the color yellow
;  vîlathazâlos Rorb veshosot Wahazûr ::
;  color-yellow.APPLIC.ActPart.FIN.3si Sun face.3si.ACC Mars.GEN
;  The Sun colors the face of Mars yellow.

$ vîlid
adjective :: yellow

$ vîlidaz
nominal `<==` passive participial :: a yellow thing
;  the-color-yellow.adjective.ActiveParticiple
;  vîlidâlen :: I am yellow.

$ -ax
verbal suffix :: passive participial marker
;  conveys passive voice when necessary
;  sometimes conveys little more than perfective aspect
;  hûdhax 
;  to-shit.PASSPART :: a turd
;  hûdhaxemp :: to-shit.PPART.unspec :: a turd that belongs to no one; an unconfessed or unpossessed turd
;  thiktaxâlos tumpash veshem :: 
;  touch.PASSPART.FIN.3si air.ABL face.1s.NOM
;  My face is touched by the atmosphere/wind.

$ tesk
verbal root :: cause, causate
;  valency :: transitive :: Subject (nom) verbs Object (acc)
;  see [[-esk]]

$ -esk
verbal suffix :: causative suffix
;  rê mûmbeskâlen tepsot ::
;  FUTURE corpse.CAUS.FIN.1s 2s.ACC
;  I will kill you.

$ mûmb
nominal :: corpse; carrion

$ rê
tense marker particle :: future tense particle

$ vê
tense marking particle :: past temse marker/particle

$ hûdh
verbal root :: to shit
;  valency :: intransitive :: Subject (nom) vb.
;  valency :: transitive :: Subject (nom) vb. Object (acc) (thing shat out)

$ kwîz :: verbal root :: to piss
;

$ kwîzax
nominal :: piss
;  valency :: intransitive :: S (nom) vb.
;  valency :: transitive :: S (nom = the pisser) vb O (acc = what's pissed out)

$ foifir
nominal :: cocaine

$ zîl
nominal :: opium

$ jûk
verbal root :: enjoy
;  valency :: transitive :: S (nom = Agent) vb. O (acc = Object)
;  jûkâleth foifirot :: He enjoys cocaine/he injects cocaine.

$  hemp
pronoun :: the unspecified or unspec personal pronoun
;  often, in possessor suffix form, denotes that the speaker doesn't know to whom a thing belongs
;  hûdhaxemp :: to-shit.PPART.unspec :: a turd that belongs to no one; an unconfessed or unpossessed turd

$ -emp
verbal subject ending :: unspecified subject

$ -emp
nominal possessor suffix :: unspecified possessor

$ thikt
verbal root :: touch
;  valency :: transitive :: Subject (nom = toucher) verbs Object (acc = the touched thing)
;  thiktaxâlos tumpast veshem :: 
;  touch.PASSPART.FIN.3si air.ABL face.1s.NOM
;  My face is touched by the atmosphere/wind.


$ dreg
verbal root :: give
;  valency :: ditransitive
;  	Subject (Agent) (nominal) verbs Object (Theme or thing given) (Accusative) Recipient (dative) 
;  Example:
;  	dregazâleth Tef yurenot Klîzînôdh
;  	give.ACT.FIN.3ss Tef money.pl.ACC the-Church.DAT


$ dregax
nominal, adject :: a gift

$ 2 tôth
adjective :: collective; pertaining to all of a thing, to a large group of
; see {$ 1 tôth}[1 tôth]

$ 1 tôth
nominal ::  a collective; all of a thing; a large number or quantity of smthg
;  counter noun similar to En. _head_ as in "head of cattle"
;  a collective is usually one of two things:
;     1. all the individuals of a type
;        hominôth Skârid :: the human.collective of Yrth; the homin population of Yrth
;     2. a typical large number of a type (the collective as orginizing principle)
;        korithôthen vipâlosen skrabenir ::
;        horse.collective.pl fast.FIN.3si xeric-waste.pl.PERL
;        Herds of horses speed across the xeric wastelands.

$ bark
nominal :: a gun of the slug-throwing variety

$ barkath
verbal root :: to shoot with a gun
;  valency :: transitive :: S (nom = shooter) vb. O (acc = what gets shot)
;  vê barkathâlen vêgorot kensos mûmbeskâlos kenetemot wel ::
;  PAST gun.APPLIC.FIN.1s wolf.ACC REL.3si corpse.CAUS.FIN.3si dog.1s.ACC ENDREL
;  I shot the wolf that killed my dog.

$ kaf
verbal root :: go, travel (to)
;  valency :: S (nom = traveler) vb 
;  valency :: S (nom = traveler) v. O (acc = destination)
;  kafâlen borgov mûmbid ::
;  	go.FIN.1s city.ALL corpse.ADJ
;  	I go to the dead city/to Dead City.
;  also this: kafâlen borgot mûmbid
;  	here borgot is in the Accusative

$ kafax
nominal `<==` passive participial :: destination

$ rûth
adjective :: pertaining to the Way of Peach-Health-Reason 

$ rûthis
abstract nominal :: Way of Peace-Health-Reason

$ io
vocative particle

$ Târ
honorific :: low to high honorific, Lord/Lady

$ jed
adverb :: already	forces perfect(ive) aspect

$ vesh
nominal :: face

$ thesh
nominal :: the wind	cf. tump :: atmosphere

$ tump
nominal :: class M atmosphere, air

$ Rorb
nominal :: Sol, the Sun

$ -thor
conjunction :: and
;  noun-phrase level conjunction
;  does not join verbs because verbs are complete sentences.
;  the conjunction _shid_ meaning "and" joins verbs
;  î tot Vovem Voveps-thor 
;  	BE one.NOM God.1s God.2s-and
;  	My God and your god are one.

$ -sest
conjunction :: but
;  noun-phrase level conjunction
;  does not join verbs because verbs are complete sentences.
;  the conjunction _shid_ meaning "and" joins verbs
;  
;  DELETE ya know, -sest might be unnecessary DELETE

$ skrab
nominal :: xeric wasteland

$ stab
verbal root :: stand `==>` live, dwell
;  valency :: S (nom) v.

$ tûth
nominal :: reason, cause

$ -ûth :: for reason, for cause	combinative form of tûth
;  Examples and usage:
;  lûth :: interrogative adverb :: for what reason, why?
;  tikûth :: for this reason (usually followed by /am/)
;  vê barkathâlen vêgorot tikûth am rûthisôdh
;  	PAST gun.APPLIC.FIN.1s wolf.ACC this.for;reason APPOS peacefulness.abstractNominalizer.DAT
;  ;  I shot the wolf for the sake of peace.

$ am
particle :: appositive particle 

$ vip
adjective :: fast

$ vip
verbal root :: to be/go fast
;  valency :: intransitive :: S (nom = the fast thing)

$ vipaz
nominal :: a fast thing

$ korith
nominal :: horse

$ bor
adverb :: not

$ boro-
prefix :: polar opposite (like un-)

$ bo-
prefix :: non-polar opposite (like non-)

$ ven
nominal :: friend 

$ Ven
honorific :: equal to equal honorific	Friend

$ spel
verbal root :: speak, say, tell
;  valency :: S (nom = speaker) vb. O (acc = what's spoken) Interlocutor (dat)

$ spelax
nominal :: utterance, word, speech

$ jagar
nominal :: word
;  Jagarôth :: nominal :: word.collective = lexicon

$ Jagarôth
nominal :: word.collective = lexicon
;  a language of the Low-Canals Region of Mars

$ borg :: nominal :: city, town
;  borgîz mûmbid stabâlethen hominen gôg shid spelâlethen Jagarôthîm ::
;  	city.LOC corpse.ADJ stand.FIN.3plSapient human.pl
;  	gôg :: adjective :: few

$ gôg
adjective :: few

$ shid
conjunction :: and
;  joins verbs
;  -thor joins everything else, but /shid/ joins verbs
;  shelelâlen shid shelelâleps ::

$ gash
conjunction :: but
;  joins verbs
;  
;  -sest does not exist
;  gash is the only word for _but_

$ hûn
modal :: modal of MORAL OBLIGATION	must

$ tên
modal :: DESIRE modal	want

$ fîn
modal :: INTENTION modal	"finna" 

$ kîn
modal :: COUNSEL modal	should

$ gûn
modal :: HOPE modal	hope

$ thîn
modal :: HYPOTHETICAL modal
;  jûjor thîn jûkâleps gaktâr-meg
;  QUESTION HYPOTHETICAL enjoy.FIN.2s enjoy.INFIN-1s.COM
;  Would you like to dance with me?

$ klîn
modal :: TRY modal

$ son
modal: can; the ABILITY or CAPABILITY modal

$ gakt
verbal root :: dance
;  valency :: S. (nom=dancer) vb. O (acc=the dance)
;  jûjor thîn jûkâleps gaktâr-meg ??
;  Would you like to dance with me?

$ koikask
nominal :: the Martian canal junque

$ jizix
;  nominal :: methamphetamine

$ hâhên
nominal :: rain

$ hâhên
verbal root :: rain falls
;  valency :: S (null subject /teb/`/`/-eb/, Nominative case) vb.
;  hâhênâleb :: finite verb w/ null subject :: rain falls

$ teb
pronoun :: the null subject

$ -eb
verbal subject marker, nominal possessor marker :: null subject 

$ -âr
verbal root suffix :: Infinitive (INFIN)

$ klal
verbal root :: love, experience pleasant feelings of familiarity towards
;  valency :: S (nom=experiencer) vb. O (perceived focus of emotion)

$ morb
verbal root :: hope, experience pleasant feelings of expectation towards
;  valency :: S (nom=experiencer) vb. O (perceived focus of emotion)

$ kodos
verbal root :: to have faith in, experience pleasant feelings of trust towards
;  valency :: S (nom=experiencer) vb. O (perceived focus of emotion)

$ tsâl
verbal root :: to fear, experience unpleasant feelings of dread/horror/terror/apprehension towards

$ Klîzîn
nominal :: the Church

$ faur :: verbal root :: construct
;  valency :: S (nom=agent) vb. O (acc=what's being constructed	 the construction)

$ faurax
nominal `<==` passive participial :: a construction	a building	 an edifice

$ fauraz
nominal `<==` active participial :: a builder, a tektôn

$ târth
nominal :: method, manner, way

$ -ârth
adverb morpheme <== târth :: by method, manner, way
;  lârth :: adverb :: by what method, manner, way	 how?
;  tikârth (am) :: adverb :: by this method (namely...)

$ tûth
nominal :: reason, cause, justification

$ -ûth
adverb morpheme <== tûth :: for reason
;  lûth :: adverb :: why
;  tikûth (am) :: adverb `<==` tik + -ûth :: for this reason (namely...)

$ tûn
nominal :: 3rd person singular obviative pronoun	person, somebody

$ -ûn :: pronoun morpheme :: person
;  lûn :: interrogative pronoun 3rd singular sapient :: who?
;  lûnen :: interrogative pronoun 3rd singular insapient :: who? 
;  used if the speaker knows beforehand that the answer will be plural
;    lûn can always be used and can be answered in the plural
;  tikûn :: this person
;  takûn :: that person
;  tokûn :: that distant person	 that stranger
;  tekûn :: that person you are talking about

$ hôken
nominal :: smoke (from fire)

$ jothor
nominal :: fire

$ tik
demonstrative :: this (near speaker)

$ tak
demonstrative :: that (near interlocutor)

$ tok
demonstrative :: that yonder (distant from both speaker and interlocutor)

$ tek
demonstrative (kinda) :: the gist of your interlocutor's argument	what your inerlocutor is taling about

$ thren
nominal :: a bosom friend

$ thren
honorific :: a bosom friend
;   used between equals


$ lak
nominal :: a social inferior

$ Lak
honorific :: the superior-to-inferior honorific

$ môn
nominal :: a person of high social prestige

$ Môn
honorific :: the honorific a highborn uses for another highborn


$ Jagarôthkin
nominal :: a speaker of Jagarôth

$ kin
nominal :: a person who is a specimen of a certain type
; used in compound nouns 
;    Jagarôthkin
;        a Jagarôth person, a person who speaks Jagarôth
;    Skârkin
;        an inhabitant of the planet Skâr


$ lîp
nominal :: a page or a document
;  lîpôth :: a book in codex form	a page-hoard


$ lîpôth
nominal :: page.multitude	a book

$ shakis
nominal :: a stellar system
;  Rorb-Shakis :: The Sol System

$ Rorb-Shakis
nominal :: the Sol System

$ nom
nominal :: a thing, an ens

$ tain
nominal :: a complex device, usually electronic or electrical
;  speltain :: a talk-device; telephone

$ speltain
nominal :: talk.device == phone

$ welk
nominal :: planet

$ kel
nominal :: a star

$ turn
nominal :: a condition, state
;  \-urn :: compound form
;  lurn :: what state? 
;     lurnîz stabâleps ??
;     What state are you in?
;     How are you?

$ -urn
nominal :: compounding form of _turn_

$ lurn
nominal :: what state? \<== l- + \-urn
;  lurnîz :: in what state?
;  lurnîz stabâleps?? What state are you in? How are you?

$ tsîts
nominal :: a fly (insect) 
;  anomalous noun because cluster at start and end
;  or maybe ts is regarded as a single phoneme

$ topap
nominal :: potato

$ kokon
nominal :: corn

$ neben
nominal :: a bean

$ hûlur
nominal :: a cat

$ bûbur
nominal :: mouth

$ veken
verbal root :: to begin
;  valency :: Subject (nominative) v. Object (accusative)
;  takûb kikvekenâleth Tef Kazot ::
;     at-that.time strike.begin.FIN.3ss Tef.NOM Kaz.ACC
;     Then Tef began striking Kaz.
;  takûb vekenâleth Tef kikârot Kazir ::
;     then begin.FIN.3ss Tef.NOM hit.INFIN.ACC Kaz.PERL
;     Then Tef began hitting Kaz.
;     NOTE :: Kaz (object of infinitive kikârot) is demoted to the perlative 
;            because the infinitive is already in the accusative



$ bal
nominal :: a god
;  velem velembalôdh !!
;  Blood for the Blood-God!!

$ velem
nominal :: blood
;  velem velembalôdh !!
;  Blood for the Blood-God!!

$ gorg
nominal :: skull
;  gorgen gorgzakarôdh
;  Skulls for the Skull-Throne

$ zakar
nominal :: throne
;  gorgen gorgzakarôdh
;  Skulls for the Skull-Throne

$ bôg
nominal :: ghost, spirit

$ bos
nominal :: positional noun - BEHIND; the location BEHIND smthg

$ feletain
nominal :: the royal court of a Martian city-state

$ flet
adverb :: still, ongoingly; forces progressive aspect
;  flet sôn gaktâlen :: STILL CAN dance.FIN.1s

$ foifir
nominal :: cocaine

$ gîm
adverb :: Sp. mucho, a lot; very
;  î shîdh gîm tan tak ::
;  BE pale mucho fellow that
;  That fellow is very pale.

$ shîdh
adjective :: pale, pallid, pasty-white

$ gorm
verbal root :: choose, pick, select
;  valency :: Subject (nom) v. Object (acc) \[ optional: Source (Ablative) \]

$ gûbur
nominal :: person of low estate

$ hâhâm
nominal :: mother

$ hogâsh
nominal :: house, home, domicile

$ heretom
adjective :: loud

$ î
anomalous verb :: asserts existence; like Sp. _hay_
;  îbor :: anomalous verb :: is not
;  îax :: anomalous verb :: has been; is no more

$ îbor
anomalous verb :: is not

$ îax
anomalous verb :: has been; is not more

$ shelel
adjective :: okay
;  shelelâlen shelelâleps-thor ::
;  I'm okay and you're okay.

$ shelelesk
verbal root :: okay.causative :: repair, fix; to make (smthg) okay
;  valency: Subject (nom) v. Object (accusative==thing made okay)
;  tainot jed sheleleskâlen
;  complex-device.ACC already okay.CAUS.FIN.1s
;  I already fixed the device.

$ shir
nominal :: collective
;  counter noun similar to En. _head_ as in "head of cattle"
;  a collective is one of three things:
;     all the individuals of a type
;        hominshir Skârid :: the human.collective of Yrth
;     a great number of a type
;        
;     a typical large number of a type (the collective as orginizing principle)
;        korithshiren vipâlosen skrabenir ::
;        horse.collectives.pl fast.FIN.3si xeric-waste.pl.PERL
;        Herds of horses speed across the xeric wastelands.

$ shis
nominal :: snow
;  shisâleb tikûb
;  snow.FIN.null this.time
;  At this time snow falls.

$ zipûb
adverb :: zip + -ûb == at-zero-time, never

$ tikûb
adverb :: at-this.time, now

$ takûb
adverb :: at-that.time, then

$ tokûb
adverb :: at-that-distant.time; long ago or in the far future
;  vê tokûb stabâleth Târmebel...
;  PAST that-distant.time stand/dwell.FIN.3ss Lord/Lady.girl...
;  Once upon a time there lived a princess...

$ tûb
nominal :: an instance, an instant in time; moment; occasion
;  lûb /when?/; tikûb /now/; takûb /then/; kekûb /at another time, otherwhen/; etc 
;     takûb;
;         tak + -ûb ::: at that time/point/moment/occasion
;         tên kafâlen zipûb Skârov.
;         desire-modal go.fin.1s zero.instance Terra.all
;         I want never to go to Terra.
;   compound form: {$ -ub}[-ub]

$ -ub
; nominal compounding morpheme :: 

$ nûn
nominal :: positional noun :: UP, the location ABOVE (smthg)
;  nûnîz tethid warpâlos wewet ::
;  ABOVE.LOC 3ss.ADJ fly.FIN.3si bird
;  Above him flies a bird.

$ vorôn
nominal :: a bear

$ 2 Vov
nominal :: a God
;  from {$ 1 vov}[1 vov] :: positional noun, the RIGHT of a thing

$ 1 vov
nominal :: location to the RIGHT of (smthg); positional noun

$ wagum
nominal :: opium or laudanum
;  both forms of opium, solid and tincture, are expressed by _wagum_

$ Wahaz
nominal :: Jagarôth name for the planet Mars

$ Marish
nominal :: Jagarôth name for the planet Venus

$ Skâr
nominal :: Jagarôth name for the planet Yrth

$ warp
verbal root :: to fly
;  valency :: Subject (nom==the flyer) v. 
;  warpâlos nûnîz wewetôth tumpir
;  UP.LOC fly.FIN.3si bird.horde atmosphere.PERL
;  Above flies a flock of birds through the air.

$ wavûm
nominal :: night, nighttime

$ wey
verbal root :: eat
;  valency :: transitive :: Subj. (nom==the eater) v. Obj. (ACC==the eaten)

$ weyax
nominal (passive participle) :: something eaten, smthg to eat; food

$ weyum
nominal :: a morsel, an ort
;  from wey _eat_ + -um (from nom :: noun :: thing, ens)

$ with
nominal :: a galla like the ancestral priestesses of Ishtar, Inana, Astarte, Kypros

$ wlap
nominal :: pig, hog

$ wrak
verbal root :: to destroy
; valency :: transitive :: S. (nom) v. O. (acc)
;  wrakâlen tepsot !!
;  I (will) destroy you!!
;  wrakaxâlemen memôth virdast ::
;  destroy.PASS.FIN.1p first-person-singular.collective time.ABL
;  the first-person-singular.collective is an interesting idea
;  The idea of regarding every one else as another I, another me,
;  and most of all not forgetting the shoulds and shouldn'ts, musts 
;  and mustn'ts which are implicated by that idea and upon 
;  which implications of shoulds and shouldn'ts, musts and mustn'ts, 
;  all persons of good will, skillful means and elegant 
;  ideas/ideals are in agreement that we should abide by them.
;  We should act as if everyone were another I.
;  Hot fucking shit it's the Golden Rule.

$ vird
nominal :: time

$ yâhor
nominal :: war (polar opposote of rûthis)

$ maimis
nominal :: insanity

$ maimid
adjective :: insane
;  from _maim_ archaic adjective "insane" 
;  {$ maimis}[maimis] also comes from archaic *maim*

$ yerth
nominal :: the color green

$ yur
nominal :: money; a piece of money; a coin
;  dregâleth Kaz yurethen Klîzînôdh ::
;  give.FIN.3ss Kaz.NOM money.3ss.pl church.DAT
;  Kaz gives his money to the Church.

$ zîl
nominal :: an illicit Martian drug
;  more dangerous than heroin or cocaine or meth

$ tometop
nominal :: tomato

$ Kahab
nominal :: Phobos
;  proper name

$ Tos
nominal :: Deimos
;  proper name



